Infochimps[http://infochimps.org] offers two APIs for users to access
and modify data:

- an XML & JSON based {RESTful API}[http://infochimps.org/api] to list, show, create, update, and destroy datasets and associated resources on Infochimps[http://infochimps.org]
- a JSON based {Query API}[http://api.infochimps.com] to query particular rows in datasets

Chimps provides a Ruby wrapper for both of these APIs (built on
RestClient) as well as a command-line tool.

See the above links for details on the sorts of parameters the
Infochimps APIs expect and the output they provide.

= Installation

Chimps is hosted as a gem on Gemcutter[http://gemcutter.org].  You can see our current gem sources with

 gem sources

If you don't see <tt>http://gemcutter.org</tt> you'll have to add it
with

  gem sources -a http://gemcutter.org

Then you can install Chimps with

  gem install chimps

== API keys 

You'll need an API key and secret from Infochimps before you can start
adding or modifying datasets via the Dataset API.  {Sign up for an
Infochimps account}[http://infochimps.org/signup] and register for an
API key.

You'll need a separate API key to use the Query API, {register for one
now}[http://api.infochimps.com/features-and-pricing].

Once you've registered for the API(s) you'll need to put them in your
<tt>~/.chimps</tt> file which should look like

    # -*-yaml-*-
    :site:
      :username: monkeyboy
      :key:      xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
      :secret:   xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx
    :query:
      :username: monkeyboy
      :key:      xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx

= Usage

Chimps can be used as a library in your own code or as a command-line
tool.

== Chimps on the Command Line

You can use Chimps directly on the command line to interact with
Infochimps.

Try running

  chimps help

to get started as well as

  chimps help COMMAND

for help on a specific command.  When running in verbose mode (with
<tt>-v</tt>), Chimps will print helpful diagnostics on each query it's
performing.

=== Testing

You can test whether or not you have access to the Infochimps Dataset API
with

  chimps test

Chimps will try and print informative error messages if it finds it
can't authenticate you.

=== Searching

Search datasets

  chimps search 'statisical abstract'

or other kinds of models

  chimps search -m source 'Department of Justice'

This _does_ _not_ require credentials for the RESTful API.

=== Listing

You can list your datasets

  chimps list

or all datasets

  chimps list -a

=== Showing

You can get more information about a particular dataset (as a YAML
document)

  chimps show my-awesome-dataset

This _does_ _not_ require credentials for the RESTful API.  

=== Creating

You can create a dataset, passing properties directly on the command
line

  chimps create title="My Awesome Dataset" description="Curt, but informative."
  16011    my-awesome-dataset    2010-05-25T22:52:16Z    My Awesome Dataset

or from a YAML input file

  chimps create my_awesome_dataset.yaml
  16011    my-awesome-dataset    2010-05-25T22:52:16Z    My Awesome Dataset

Examples of input files are in the <tt>examples</tt> directory of the
Chimps distribution.

=== Updating

You can also update an existing dataset

  chimps update my-awesome-dataset title="My TOTALLY Awesome Dataset"

Passing in data works just like the <tt>create</tt> command.

=== Destroying

You can destroy datasets as well

  chimps destroy my-awesome-dataset

=== Downloading

You can download a dataset from Infochimps

  chimps download my-awesome-dataset

which will put it in the current directory.  

You can also specify a format or package.

  chimps download -f csv -p tar.bz2 my-awesome-dataset

=== Uploading

You can upload data from your local machine to an existing dataset at
Infochimps

  chimps upload my-awesome-dataset /path/to/my/data/*
  16005    boozer    2010-05-20T13:58:07Z    boozer

Chimps will package all the files you specify into a single archive
and upload it.  You can annotate the upload with a particular format
(though Chimps will try and guess).  Chimps will NOT make an archive
if you only attempt to upload a single file and it is already an
archive.

Chimps uses the {Infinite
Monkeywrench}[http://github.com/infochimps/imw] to process the data
for uploads.

=== Batch Jobs

Chimps allows you to peform batch requests against the Infochimps REST
API in which many changes are affected through a single API call.

  chimps batch batch_data.yaml
  Status     Resource    ID       Errors                                      
  created    source      13671
  created    dataset     16013
  invalid                         Title is too short (minimum is 4 characters)
  
The contents in <tt>batch_data.yaml</tt> specify an array of resources
to update or create.  Each resource's data can be attached to local
paths to upload.  These paths will be packaged and uploaded (just as
in the +upload+ command) after the batch update finishes.

Errors in a particular resource will not cause the whole batch job to
fail (as above).

Learn more about the format of the <tt>batch_data.yaml</tt> file by
looking at the example in the +examples+ directory of the Chimps
distribution or by visiting the {Infochimps REST
API}[http://infochimps.org/api].

=== Querying

You can also use Chimps to make queries against the Infochimps Query
API.

  chimps query soc/net/tw/influence screen_name=infochimps
  {"replies_out":13,"account_age":602,"statuses":166,"id":15748351,"replies_in":22,"screen_name":"infochimps"}

where parameters to include for a _single_ query can be passed in on
the command line.

If you pass in the path to a YAML file then it must consist of an
array of such parameter hashes and will result in multiple queries
being made (to the same dataset)

  chimps query soc/net/tw/influene query.yaml
  {"replies_out":13,"account_age":602,"statuses":166,"id":15748351,"replies_in":22,"screen_name":"infochimps"}
  {"replies_out":940,"account_age":440,"statuses":5015,"id":19058681,"replies_in":88909,"screen_name":"aplusk"}
  {"replies_out":0,"account_age":1123,"statuses":634,"id":813286,"replies_in":14541,"screen_name":"BarackObama"}

== Chimps as a Library

You can also use Chimps in your own code to handle making requests of
Infochimps.

At present, Chimps' classes internally use the JSON API so you'll have
to as well -- support for the XML API will be coming soon...

=== Configuration Options

When invoked from the command-line, Chimps automatically reads
configuration files before executing requests.  When used as a library
via

  require 'rubygems'
  require 'chimps'

Chimps will *NOT* read default configuration files.  You can force it
to do so by calling

  Chimps::Config.load

which will load from the configuration file defined in
Chimps::CONFIG[:identity_file].  You can alternatively set
configuration options directly in Chimps::CONFIG yourself (they should
match the structure of a <tt>~/.chimps</tt> file).

=== Using the Dataset API

You can find a complete list of Dataset API endpoints, expected
parameters, return codes, documentation, and authentication
requirements at http://infochimps.com/api.

The Chimps::Request class makes requests against the Dataset API.
Create a request by specifying a path on the Infochimps server (it
_must_ end with <tt>.json</tt> for now).

  list_dataset_request = Chimps::Request.new('/datasets.json')
  list_dataset_request.get

Assuming you've properly configured Chimps (see above) you ask the
request to sign itself.

  authenticated_list_datasets_request = Chimps::Request.new('/datasets.json', :authenticate => true)

(not necessary for a list datasets request, but you get the idea).
You can also pass in query params

  authenticated_list_datasets_request_with_params = Chimps::Request.new('/datasets.json', :query_params => { :id => 'infochimps' }, :authenticate => true)

For POST and PUT requests you can also include data, which will also
be signed if you ask.

  authenticated_create_dataset_request = Chimps::Request('/datasets.json', :data => { :title => "My Awesome Dataset", :description => "An amazing description." }, :authenticate => true)
  authenticated_create_dataset_request.post

The +get+, +post+, +put+, and +delete+ methods of a Chimps::Request
all return a Chimps::Response which automatically parses the response
body into Ruby data structures.

=== Using the Query API

The Chimps::QueryRequest class makes requests against the Query API.
It works just the similarly to the Chimps::Request except that the
path supplied is the path to the corresponding dataset on the {Query
API}[http://api.infochimps.com].

All QueryRequests will automatically be signed.

  authenticated_query_request = Chimps::QueryRequest.new('soc/net/tw/trstrank.json', :query_params => { :screen_name => 'infochimps' } )
  authenticated_query_request.get

=== Using Workflows

In addition to making single requests, Chimps also has a few workflows
which automate sequences of requests needed for certain complex tasks
(like uploading or downloading of data, both of which require
authorization tokens).

The three workflows implemented so far include

- Chimps::Workflows::Up
- Chimps::Workflows::Downloader
- Chimps::Workflows::BatchUpdater

Consult the documentation for each workflow to learn how to use it.  A
brief example of how to use the Downloader:

  downloader = Chimps::Workflows::Downloader.new(:dataset => 'my-awesome-dataset')
  downloader.execute! # performs download

= Contributing

Chimps is an open source project created by the Infochimps team to
encourage adoption of the Infochimps APIs.  The official repository is
hosted on GitHub

  http://github.com/infochimps/chimps

Feel free to clone it and send pull requests.